URL:         https://www.defensa.gob.es/documents/2073105/3095923/estrategia_rusa_en_el_mediterraneo_2026_dieeeo08_eng.pdf
Кінцевий:    https://www.defensa.gob.es/documents/2073105/3095923/estrategia_rusa_en_el_mediterraneo_2026_dieeeo08_eng.pdf
Заголовок:   estrategia_rusa_en_el_mediterraneo_2026_dieeeo08_eng.pdf
Дата публ.:  не вказана на сторінці
Завантажено: 2026-09-01 13:58 UTC
HTTP:        200   Тип: application/pdf   Байтів: 836592
Оригінал:    raw/25-defensa.gob.es-estrategia_rusa_en_el_mediterraneo_2026_dieeeo08_eng.pd.pdf
sha256:      bc9eba9ca82829a41e06cd68ecbca58eb3470a49a5aa917e11a869f6152ca61a
Витяг:       pdftotext

==============================================================================
                                            Opinion

                                            Paper

                                   08/2026  23/01/2026

                                                            Alberto Priego*

                                                 Russian strategy in the
                                            Mediterranean: A second front

Visit webpage  Receive Newsletter

       Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second
                                     front

Abstract:

Since the beginning of the Cold War, the USSR has concentrated its military efforts on
Central Europe. The Mediterranean Sea has long been a region of influence for the United
States and its allies. The most Moscow achieved was to have a military base in Syria that
allowed it to avoid the Turkish straits. However, with the end of the Cold War, the situation
changed completely. Central Europe became NATO territory, and Russia had to retreat
its line of confrontation. As a complementary strategy, Russia began to strengthen its
position in the Mediterranean through both conventional and unconventional means. In
addition to its traditional alliances with Algeria and Libya, it formed others beyond the
Sahara Desert, supporting coups in places such as Mali, the Central African Republic and
Burkina Faso. Almost without realising it, Europe has seen a second front open, where
the threats are not only unconventional but also much more diffuse.

Keywords: Russia, Mediterranean Sea, Africa Corp, Military Bases.

How to quote:

PRIEGO, Alberto. Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front. Opinion Paper. IEEE
08/2026. web link IEEE and/or link bie3 (accessed on the web day/month/year)

*NOTE: The ideas contained in the Opinion Papers shall be responsibility of their authors,
            without necessarily reflecting the thinking of the IEEE or the Ministry of Defense.

               Opinion Paper       08/2026                                                       1
                   Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

                       Alberto Priego

In 2007, Russia implemented a revisionist foreign and security policy. Although Europe
was the most obvious theatre of operations, with the invasions of Georgia (2008) and
Ukraine (2014 and 2022), the old continent was not the only place where Moscow sought
to rebalance its capabilities. The Mediterranean went from being a secondary stage to
becoming another theatre of operations in the conflict between Russia and Europe.
Although during the Cold War the existence of a land buffer between Russia and NATO
meant that Russia considered the Mediterranean to be a less critical arena, the
enlargement of the Atlantic Alliance reduced the security glacis, prompting Russia to use
the Mediterranean as an arena for confrontation. Furthermore, the invasions of Abkhazia,
Crimea and the rest of Ukraine reinforced Russia's view of the Black Sea and the
Mediterranean Sea as a single space. Finally, the fall of Bashar al-Assad and the
subsequent dismantling of Russian military facilities in Syria have led Russia to initiate a
policy of control over a sea, the Mediterranean, which until now had been the Mare
Nostrum.

Soviet policy towards the Mediterranean Sea.

One of the Soviet Union's main strategic shortcomings was Moscow's difficulty in gaining
access to warm seas. This problem was particularly acute in the European part of Russia,
as the straits of Denmark, the Dardanelles and Gibraltar meant that the USSR was
effectively landlocked. In addition to this geopolitical complication, or perhaps because of
it, the Soviet Union ruled out developing a navy comparable to that of the United States.
In fact, Khrushchev went so far as to describe the Soviet navy as ‘a rowboat crewed by
Soviet sailors on a Russian lake’1.

It was not until the arrival of Sergei Gorshkov that Moscow began to compete with the
United States in naval terms. The technological revolution introduced by Gorshkov
enabled Soviet ships to operate farther from the coast, thereby achieving greater strategic
capacity2. The Soviet Navy became a ‘blue-water navy’.

The Soviets, as well as the Russians today, have three fleets in Europe (the Northern,

1 ROUCEK, Joseph “Las implicaciones de la expansión Naval Soviética en el Mediterráneo” Revista de Estudios

Políticos, Num. 117, 1970, p. 128.
2 DARBY, Joseph “The Soviet Doctrine of the Closed Sea” San Diego Law Review, May/June Vol. 23 No. 3, p. 686.

Opinion Paper  08/2026  2
                   Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

                       Alberto Priego

Baltic, and Black Sea fleets), although they conceive of them as a single fleet sailing all
the waters surrounding the European continent. The element that best illustrates this
assertion is the name used to describe the Mediterranean naval grouping: the
Mediterranean Squadron. This is a maritime group that was fed equally by ships from the
Black Sea Fleet, the Northern Fleet and the Baltic Fleet. This peculiarity was a direct
consequence of the absence of ports in which to moor Soviet ships. For this reason, the
Soviets were forced to use tankers and repair ships anchored in international waters in
the Gulf of Hammamet, the Gulf of Sirte, and the Gulf of Alborán to carry out their repair
and supply operations.

While it is true that the USSR sought to favour socialist governments in places such as
Algeria, Egypt and Libya, Moscow never managed to turn the Mediterranean into a sea
of safe harbours. In fact, it is striking that Stalin did not provide the expected support to
the communist guerrillas of ELAS (People's National Liberation Army), a task that was
delegated to the Yugoslavs, and ultimately led to Greece siding with NATO. The
explanation for this lack of interest can be found in the consideration given to the
Mediterranean, a sea that, far from being a Soviet strategic priority, was regarded as a
secondary theatre of operations.

While it is true that the Sixth Fleet and the American bases in Crete, Rota and Naples
might lead us to believe that Moscow was vying with the United States for control of the
Mediterranean, the reality is that this sea was never a strategic priority for the Kremlin.
Proof of this lack of interest can be found in the absence of a “Mediterranean fleet”
comparable to that of the Black Sea or the Baltic and, above all, in the fact that only
torpedo boats were deployed in Mediterranean waters and that the submarines that plied
its waters rarely carried ballistic missiles.

However, we must highlight Moscow's successes in the Eastern Mediterranean,
particularly in Syria, where it has established both a naval base and an air base. However,
it also suffered some resounding failures, such as in Vlora (Albania), where it was unable
to establish a naval base despite the ideological affinity of the Tirana government.

In short, the Mediterranean Sea was nothing more than a secondary theatre for the
USSR, where Moscow failed to establish a network of bases comparable to that of the
US or a deployment point for a naval force like the American Sixth Fleet. The explanation

Opinion Paper  08/2026  3
                   Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

                       Alberto Priego

for this situation is straightforward: Moscow prioritised Central Europe as a front for
confrontation with the West. The 1,731,000 square kilometres of glacis that the USSR
established between Berlin and Moscow led the Kremlin to consider the Mediterranean
Sea as a non-priority area. However, the end of the USSR completely changed Russia's
strategic assessment of the Mediterranean. Furthermore, the incorporation of Estonia,
Latvia, Lithuania, Bulgaria and Romania into NATO shook Russian hegemony in two of
the seas where it had its ‘European fleets’: the Black Sea and the Baltic Sea.

All these events led to a shift in Moscow's perspective on the Mediterranean, rendering
this sea a region of great strategic importance. In fact, the Russian Maritime Doctrine of
2022 recognises this change by classifying the Mediterranean and its adjacent waters as
an ‘Important Area’3. However, beyond the Kremlin's wishes, Russia continues to face
severe difficulties in achieving its objectives in the region, and its submarines are still
forced to leave the Mediterranean due to the impossibility of finding friendly ports where
they can be repaired. This lack of capacity does not mean that Russia is abandoning its
efforts to influence the region. Still, it does mean that Moscow is projecting instability,
rather than stability, to deter Europeans from the Southern Shore.

Russian policy towards the Mediterranean Sea

Regarding the Mediterranean, it is worth noting that Russia has broadly adopted the
USSR's conception of the region. However, this has had to be adapted to Putin's
ambitions and the current limitations of the Russian Federation. The 2022 Russian
Maritime Doctrine mentions ‘the Atlantic region’, an area comprising the Baltic, Black and
Mediterranean seas, which coincides entirely with the area occupied by the USSR's
‘European fleet’. The difference between the ‘European fleet’ of the USSR era and the
‘Atlantic Region’ of Putin's era lies in the value that the Kremlin attaches to the
Mediterranean. While in Soviet times the Mediterranean was subordinate to the glacis of
Central and Eastern Europe, now, with the loss of that territory, the Mediterranean has
become a main theatre of operations for Russia.

3 PARMAR, Sarabjeet, SAWAN, Ranendra and AGNIBOTRI, Kamlesh “National Maritime Foundation “Maritime
Doctrine of the Russian Federation 2022. An Analysis” National Maritime Foundation, August 2022, p. 4.

Opinion Paper  08/2026  4
Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

Alberto Priego

GLACIS

Map 1. Balance of Power in Europe between 1949 and 2025. Own Elaboration.

However, despite this conception, Russia's technical shortcomings prevent Moscow from
fully implementing its strategy of control over the Mediterranean, forcing the Kremlin to
use non-traditional means to promote instability and provoke the departure of Europeans
from the countries on the southern shore of the Mediterranean.

The Mediterranean in Russian strategy

Since the Russian Navy's Operational Unit in the Mediterranean (Pyataya Eskadra) was
officially established in 2010, Russia has shown increasing interest in the Mediterranean
Sea. Although Russia's presence in the Mediterranean remains limited, NATO's
expansion has increased Russian interest in the Mediterranean Sea. The 2001 Russian
Maritime Doctrine was replaced by the 2015 version, followed by the 2022 version, in
which Russia clearly reveals its intentions for the Mediterranean. However, its strategy is
not limited to the Maghreb and Mashreq but has greater strategic significance as it seeks
to control a large part of the Sahel countries. To this end, between 2020 and 2023, Russia
supported and encouraged a series of coups in places such as Mali (2021), Burkina Faso
(2022) and Niger (2023)4

All these actions have been aimed at controlling the governments of these countries, and
above all, at severing their ties with the West. In this way, Moscow uses the Sahel as a
factory of instability that it then spills over into the Mediterranean, so that it reaches
Europe and destabilises our societies. To this end, Russia does not hesitate to use the
capabilities it is developing in the Mediterranean basin, capabilities which, although they

4 “Military coups in Mali in 2020 and 2021, one in Burkina Faso in 2022, and in Niger in 2023 resulted in the expulsion
of U.S., French, and other Western forces, and an influx of Russian forces” The Soufan Center, 31st March 2025.
Avaible at https://thesoufancenter.org/intelbrief-2025-march-31/

Opinion Paper  08/2026                                 5
                   Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

                       Alberto Priego

do not serve to control Europe's southern flank, do serve to destabilise Europe and cause
European countries to disagree on where they should deploy their resources.

Having explained Russia's doctrine in the Mediterranean and the Sahel, we will now
analyse the military capabilities, port infrastructure, and unconventional means that
Russia employs on this southern flank. Let's examine these three aspects.

Capabilities: It is not easy to establish with certainty the specific number of personnel that
make up the Operational Unit. Although the official allocation is 15 vessels, the
Operational Unit typically consists of three frigates, one or two submarines, and a few
support vessels. As far as submarines are concerned, at least two have been sighted,
although some reports have pointed to as many as five5. The submarines identified in the
Mediterranean are the Krasnodar (B-265) and the Mozhaisk (B-608). Both the Krasnodar
and the Mozhaisk are Kilo 636.6 class submarines (SSK6). The Krasnodar, known to
Western sailors as ‘the black hole’ due to its low acoustic signature, has had several
encounters with Spanish ships7, as the Russian submarine has been too close to our
territorial waters8.

Another submarine commonly found in the warm waters of the Mediterranean is the
Novorossiysk, another Kilo-class (636.3) submarine similar to the Krasnodar and the
Mozhaisk, but slightly older. The real danger of these vessels lies in their ability to carry
Kalibr missiles, which can be launched while the submarine is fully submerged. Despite
this presence, since the fall of Bashar al-Assad, submarines have been experiencing
severe difficulties operating in the Mediterranean, as they have no support ports where
they can resupply or be repaired. Russia is therefore desperately seeking ports to moor
its ships.

As far as frigates are concerned, the Admiral Grigorovich (Krivak V class) has been
identified, which, in addition to carrying Kalibr missiles, can transport Ka-21 and Ka-31
helicopters. Two of the ships that most concern Europeans are the Admiral Golovko and
the Admiral Gorshkov (Gorshkov class9). These are two more advanced frigates than the

5 The number of Russian submarines in the Mediterranean has increased to five. Snorkel, 11 September 2021.
6 Diesel-powered and capable of carrying Kalibr missiles.
7 The Galicia Amphibious Ship and the Baleares Frigate.
8 “El submarino ruso ‘Krasnodar’ se pasea por el Mediterráneo bajo la atenta mirada de la española ‘Álvaro de Bazán”

Delta 13 News, 21st April de 2025
9 The name Gorshkov is used in honour of the moderniser of the Soviet fleet.

Opinion Paper  08/2026  6
                   Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

                       Alberto Priego

Grigorovich, which also have the capacity to launch hypersonic missiles such as the
Zirkon. In fact, in December 2024, Russia demonstrated its strength in the Eastern
Mediterranean by launching Zirkov missiles from the two aforementioned Gorshkov-class
frigates and a Kalibr missile from the aforementioned Novorossiisk submarine. As
mentioned above, the Novorossiisk is also sometimes found in the Mediterranean, but
being an older model (2014), it is more prone to breakdowns. In fact, in October 2025,
the Novorossiisk10 suffered a serious technical mishap in the waters off Gibraltar, forcing
it to be towed by the Yakov Grebelsky under the watchful eye of the British and Dutch,
who monitored its tow11.

In addition to these vessels, the Russian Operational Unit in the Mediterranean has an
intelligence ship and a supply ship. Regarding the former, the Spanish Navy has
repeatedly detected the presence of the Viktor Leonov, a maritime espionage ship known
as ‘Putin's Ear’ due to its design to intercept communications and gather information12.
Regarding the second type, the Vyazma and Yelnya13 are noteworthy, as they serve as
mother ships that provide refuelling and supply centres for the rest of the Operational
Unit. In addition to serving as support vessels, both ships are known to carry out acts of
sabotage against submarine communications or power cables.

Ports and Airports: The second element we should highlight is the network of ports and
airports that Russia is building in Africa. Since the beginning of the Cold War, Russia has
been interested in establishing warm-water ports in the Mediterranean, as this sea
presents significant logistical challenges for its ships. The shallow waters of the Turkish
straits, combined with the legal restrictions imposed by the Montreux Convention, mean
that Russia cannot deploy its boats in the Mediterranean as it would like. For this reason,
the Soviet Union established an alliance with Syria, whose primary objective was to
secure access to the port of Tartus. However, despite Putin's efforts in the Syrian War,
the Kremlin has been unable to support its ally, and the fall of Bashar al-Assad's regime

10 “Rusia hizo pruebas de lanzamiento de misiles hipersónicos en el Mediterráneo oriental” Infobae, 3rd December
2024
11 “Así terminó el submarino ruso "cojeante" del que se burla el secretario general la OTAN” La Razón, 14th October
2025.
12 “Increased Presence of Russian Spy Ships Around Europe: Viktor Leonov Vessel enters the Mediterranean Sea”
Naval News, 16th April 2025. Available at https://www.armyrecognition.com/news/navy-news/2025/increased-
presence-of-russian-spy-ships-around-europe-viktor-leonov-vessel-enters-the-mediterranean
13 “Russian Tanker Yelnya docks in Algeria following strategic withdrawal from Tartus Naval Base” Naval News Navy,
20th December 2024. Disponible en https://www.armyrecognition.com/news/navy-news/2024/russian-tanker-
yelnya-docks-in-algeria-following-strategic-withdrawal-from-tartus-naval-base

Opinion Paper  08/2026  7
                   Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

                       Alberto Priego

has dealt a severe blow to Moscow's strategy in the Mediterranean. Ahmed al-Charaa's
rise to power has precipitated events, causing Russia to lose its only Mediterranean port.
Thus, Russia's strategy in the Mediterranean has collapsed, as Moscow urgently needs
safe ports for its ships.

Perhaps the preferred location for establishing ‘the new Tartus’ is the Libyan port of
Tobruk14. Although indeed, the Kremlin does not yet have a naval base like the one it had
in Syria, Russia has been unloading material from Tartus at the port of Tobruk for months,
an enclave controlled by its ally, Marshal Haftar. In addition to Tobruk, Moscow has the
Libyan air base at Al-Khadim and, near Benghazi15, the Ghardabiya airfield, a facility that
seems to have become the new Khmeimim (Syria). Along with Tobruk, Al-Khadim and
Ghardabiya, Russia is establishing itself in the interior of Libya by rebuilding the Al Jufra,
Brek Al Shati and Matan al-Sarra bases16. The latter is a former air base on the border
with Chad that is being restored by Russian troops and mercenaries from the Wagner
Group (formerly known as the Africa Corps17). Some reports indicate that in August 2024,
Russia deployed between 2,000 and 2,500 men in Libya, most of whom belonged to the
Africa Corps18. In total, although still under construction, Russia has five air facilities and
one port in Libya, that of Tobruk, capable of accommodating its submarines. This network
of ports and airports makes the North African country a new stronghold in the
Mediterranean for Russia19.

14 “With Eyes on Sahel, Russia Shifts From Syria to Libya” Africa Defence Forum, 22nd July 2025. Disponible en
https://adf-magazine.com/2025/07/with-eyes-on-sahel-russia-shifts-from-syria-to-libya/
15 “Libya's Al-Khadim airbase becomes a hub for Russian arms in the Sahel” Radio Francia Internacional, 23rd June
2025. Available at https://www.rfi.fr/en/africa/20250623-libya-s-al-khadim-airbase-becomes-a-hub-for-russian-
arms-in-the-sahel
16 McGREGOR, Andrew “Russia Increasing Military Presence in Africa by Reviving Desert Airbase in the Libyan Sahara”
Jamestown Founation, 17th April 2025.
17 The two-year-old Africa Corps, which has links to a covert branch of Russia’s army, is ascendant at a time when
U.S. and European troops have been withdrawing from the region, forced out by sub-Saharan nations turning to
Russia for security” Associated Press, 11th June 2025. Available at https://www.ap.org/news-
highlights/spotlights/2025/russia-skirts-western-sanctions-to-ramp-up-its-military-footprint-in-africa/
18 “By August 2024, there were a reported 2,000 - 2,500 Africa Corps personnel deployed at various military sites in
Libya” The Soufan Center, 31st March 2025. Available at https://thesoufancenter.org/intelbrief-2025-march-31/
19 “The developments [at Maaten al-Sarra] are consistent with Russia's strategy to establish multiple military bases
in Libya, positioning them as a central hub for the African Corps command”The New Arab, 28th January 2025.
Available at https://www.newarab.com/news/russia-assert-africa-europe-power-libya-airbase-expansion

Opinion Paper  08/2026  8
Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

Alberto Priego

                                      Tobruz

                           Al-Khadim

               Ghardabiya

                AL Jufra

Brek al Shati,

                                   Matan-al Sarra

Mapa 2. Russian Military facilities in Libya. Own Elaboration.

We cannot fail to mention Algeria, a country that has increased its cooperation with
Russia in recent years, even holding joint military exercises. Although Algeria has been
a strategic partner of Moscow since the 1960s, the increase in collaboration and, above
all, fears that Russia could establish a naval base in the North African country have set
off alarm bells. In recent months, Umm al-Assal20 has served as a base for Russian MIG-
29M221 fighter jets, prompting Algeria to upgrade its military facilities. Specifically, the
Algiers government has been extending its runways, building ammunition arsenals and
developing long-range radars.

These measures suggest Algiers is preparing the Umm al-Assal base for the arrival of
state-of-the-art Russian aircraft22, such as the Sukhoi 34, 35 and 7423. Perhaps the point
of most significant concern to the West in the relationship between Algiers and Moscow

20 “Russia Considers Building Ports in Several African Countries” Northen Africa News, 24th April 2024. Available at

https://nan.media/en/russia-considers-building-ports-in-several-african-countries/
21 CHARPENTREAU, Clement “Algerian MiG-29M2 spotted for the first time” Aerotime, 2nd February 2021.
22 NIKOLOV, Boyco “Russian-backed Algerian MiG-29 base stirs Morocco border fears” Bulgarian Military. 10th
October 2025
23 DE LOYOLA, Esteban “Argelia, primer país africano que operará el Su-57E ruso” El Confidencial Digital, 8th OCtober

2025.

Opinion Paper             08/2026                      9
                   Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

                       Alberto Priego

is the naval base at Mers El-Kébir24, a port near Oran that is only 140 km from Almeria,
within range of Russian short-range missiles such as those being used in Ukraine. For
this reason, Russia has been investing money in this facility since 2021, as it not only
hosts personnel permanently but also provides significant support for refuelling and
repairing its submarines25.

                                       Mers El-Kébir

Umm al-Assal

Map 3. Russian military facilities in Algeria. Own Elaboration

To complete the map of Russian military installations, it is worth noting that last February,
Moscow and Khartoum signed an agreement to establish a military base in Port Sudan26.
Beyond the Kremlin's current policy towards the Mediterranean, the installation of a base
in the Red Sea is an old Russian ambition that it has been pursuing for more than 25
years. The facility being built there will serve as a supply point for Russian ships and also
a barracks for 300 Russian soldiers, available for air transport to nearby locations27.

24 Russia Eyes Naval Base in Algeria Near Moroccan Border” Bladi.net, 13 abril de 2021.
25 ZOUBIR, Yahia “Algeria-Russia Ties: Beyond Military Cooperation?” Middle East Council on Global Affairs, Issue
Brief, January 2024. Disponible en https://mecouncil.org/publication/algerian-russian-relations-military-
cooperation/
26 PEYRONNET, Arnaud “Sudan, Russia’s new gateway to Africa and the Indian Ocean” 6th March 2021. Fondation
Méditerranéenne d'Études Stratégiques. Available at https://fmes-france.org/sudan-russias-new-gateway-to-africa-
and-the-indian-ocean/
27 “The deal allows Russia to set up a naval base with up to 300 Russian soldiers, and also to simultaneously keep up
to four navy ships, including nuclear-powered ones, in Port Sudan on the Red Sea” Al Jazeera, 2nd June 2021,
Available at https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2021/6/2/military-chief-says-sudan-reviewing-naval-base-deal-with-
russia

Opinion Paper  08/2026  10
                   Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

                       Alberto Priego

.

 Russian naval base
    refuelling

Under construction
 Military base
 African Corp

                             Mers El Kebir  Al-Khadim  Tobruk

                     Umm
                     al-Assal

                                            Matan Al Sarra

                                                                Port Sudan

MAP 4: Russian deployment in Africa and the Mediterranean Sea

No traditional means: While it is true that we have seen how Russia uses conventional
means to defend its interests in the Mediterranean, it is no less accurate that Moscow
does not hesitate to use less traditional means to this end. Essentially, we are discussing
emigration as a tool and the so-called ‘ghost ships’.

Opinion Paper                                          08/2026              11
                   Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

                       Alberto Priego

Migration: As it has done in other places such as Finland28 or Poland29, Russia is using
migration as a weapon of war or, at least, as a means of destabilising European societies.
To achieve this goal, it is essential to control those governments in whose territory the
main south-north migratory movements originate or take place.

As mentioned above, since 2021, states such as Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger have
begun to replace their governments with others that are less democratic and more
favourable to Moscow; their migration policies have become increasingly less cooperative
with Europe. Particularly significant is the case of Niger, a state governed by a military
junta whose first measure was to abolish the controversial Law 2015/3630, a legislative
provision that prohibited the trafficking of migrants in Niger. The law mentioned above,
which was developed with legal advice from the UNODC and financial support from the
EU, was essentially an adaptation of the UN Protocol Against the Smuggling of Migrants.

In this strategy of using emigration as a weapon of war, we must highlight some of the
military bases that Russia has established in the Sahel, as these locations are not only
strategic military points but also key sites for controlling migratory flows. An example of
this is the aforementioned Matan al-Sarra military base31, a site that, in addition to being
a military installation, is an oasis used by mafias on their migration routes to Europe. From
there, they follow a path through places where Russia has military installations until they
reach the port of Tobruk, where they embark on their journey to Italy.

The first to raise the alarm about this phenomenon was Italian intelligence, which warned
that Russia was using migration to destabilise European governments. In fact, Draghi's
government fell in September 2022 due to a migration crisis originating in Libya,
prompting Draghi and Conte to request a formal investigation into Russian interference
in the process32. The investigation took on particular significance due to the use that

28 GERA, Vanesa “Por qué Finlandia culpa a Rusia de repentino arribo de migrantes a su frontera oriental” Infobae,
23th November 2023. Available at https://www.infobae.com/america/mundo/2023/11/26/por-que-finlandia-
culpa-a-rusia-de-repentino-arribo-de-migrantes-a-su-frontera-oriental/
29 DEUTSCHE WELLE “Polonia acusa a Moscú de orquestar crisis migratoria” 10th November 2021. Available at
https://www.dw.com/es/polonia-acusa-a-moscú-de-orquestar-crisis-migratoria/a-59773022
30 CLINGENDAEL “Niger’s Repeal of the 2015/36 Anti-Smuggling Law”, Clingendael Alert, July 2024. Available at
https://www.clingendael.org/sites/default/files/2024-08/Clingendael_Alert_Nigers_Repeal_of_the_2015-36_Anti-
Smuggling_Law.pdf
31 McGREGOR, Andrew “Today, Kufra (Matan al-Sarra) is an important staging point for illegal African migrants
making for the Mediterranean coast and ultimately Europe” Jamestown, 17th April 2025. Disponible en
https://jamestown.org/program/russia-increasing-military-presence-in-africa-by-reviving-desert-airbase-in-the-
libyan-sahara/
32 KEALNER, James “Thousands of migrants are being sent across the Mediterranean Sea from areas in Libya

Opinion Paper  08/2026  12
                   Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

                       Alberto Priego

Putin's ally, Matteo Salvini, made of the migration33 crisis and the resulting shift in Italian
politics.

Ghost ships: For several years now, Russia has been using a fleet of ‘ghost ships’ that
appear to sail aimlessly from the Baltic to the Mediterranean. Although these ships were
initially used to evade sanctions34 imposed on Russia for its oil sales35, their functions
extend beyond this task.

Regarding the oil, Russia utilises these flag-of-convenience36 ships to conduct what is
known as Ship-to-Ship (STS) transfers. In other words, a huge crude carrier (VLCC37)
transfers Russian oil to another vessel exempt from sanctions in international waters,
thereby avoiding controls. One of the preferred locations for these oil exchanges is the
coast of Ceuta and Melilla. The port authorities of both cities are aware of these
manoeuvres and, despite warning port operators that they are liable to sanctions if they
facilitate the operation, there is nothing they can do, as the operation takes place outside
the 12 miles of Spanish territorial waters. Once the oil has been laundered, it is
transported freely to its destination — mainly India and China — where it is sold at prices
well above the $60 set by the sanctions. Thanks to this money, Russia can continue to
maintain its war machine in Ukraine, as this activity accounts for 80% of Moscow's energy
revenues, which translates into around €5 billion per year38.

As far as routes are concerned, those with the highest tonnage bypass Africa, while those
with lower tonnage cross the Mediterranean, docking as necessary at ports established
by Moscow39 in the Mediterranean and the Red Sea.

In addition to transporting oil, which is estimated to account for 10%40 of the world’s total,

controlled by the Wagner mercenary group” The Telegrapah, 25th July 2025
33 CRIPS, James “Collapse of Italian government 'plays into Putin's hands'” The Telegraph, 16 July 2022.
34 “Russia Uses ‘Ghost Fleet’ to Evade Sanctions, Traffic Weapons Across Africa” Africa Defence Forum, 22nd April

2025. Available https://adf-magazine.com/2025/04/russia-uses-ghost-fleet-to-evade-sanctions-traffic-weapons-
across-africa/
35 With the invasion of Ukraine in 2022, the G7 forced Russia to sell oil below $60 per barrel.
36 Russia has a ghost fleet consisting of some 600 ships that are over 20 years old. The creator of this fleet was Timur

Ivanov, who was arrested on corruption charges in 2024.
37 Very Large Crude Oil Carrier
38 “Qué es y cómo opera la “flota fantasma rusa” que mantiene en vilo a Occidente” Infobae, 29th December

2024.
39 “Economía rusa: la flota fantasma de Moscú está más expuesta que nunca a las sanciones” Le Grand
Continent, 11th May 2025. Available at https://legrandcontinent.eu/es/2025/05/11/economia-rusa-la-flota-
fantasma-de-moscu-esta-mas-expuesta-que-nunca-a-las-sanciones/
40 MUÑOZ ABAD, Rafael “El fenómeno de la flota fantasma y sus riesgos para España” Real Instituto
Elcano. 28 July 2025. Available at https://www.realinstitutoelcano.org/analisis/el-fenomeno-de-la-flota-

Opinion Paper  08/2026  13
                   Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

                       Alberto Priego

the ghost fleet has been used for other purposes such as transporting weapons to places
like Syria, Libya and Ukraine, and sabotaging Western interests.

It is well known that the Russian ghost fleet is not limited to oil transport exclusively. Other
functions performed by these ships include sabotage, surveillance and the transport of
drones. In the case of sabotage, there have been several incidents involving vessels from
the Russian ghost fleet. The most famous of these incidents occurred in December 2024,
when the Finnish navy captured one of the Russian ‘ghost fleet’ ships, the Eagle S, as it
was preparing to cut the Estlink 241 submarine cable connecting Finland to the rest of the
European continent with its anchor. Although fortunately they failed, the aim was to leave
Finland without power on Christmas Day, when Europeans flock to Rovaniemi, the city of
Santa Claus. Espionage is another task carried out by this fleet. An example of these
actions can be found in Vyazma42, a tanker linked to the Russian Operational Unit that
usually moves between the Mediterranean and the Atlantic, and has been immobilised
on several occasions due to charges of carrying out espionage activities on behalf of the
Russian government.

The third of these activities is the transport of drones that flooded the airspace of several
European states in September. On 22 September, the French navy intercepted a tanker
flying the flag of Benin, the Bocaray43, for its involvement in the deployment of drones in
Poland and Denmark44. This arms transport work has resulted in the loss of several ships
for Russia, which, according to Moscow, have suffered various acts of sabotage. In total,
Russia has lost five ghost ships in unexplained incidents or accidents. Of these five
events, four45 have occurred in the Mediterranean, which gives us an idea of the tension
in the area. These are the four incidents that happened in the Mediterranean.

fantasma-y-sus-riesgos-para-espana/
41 BOCKMANN, Michelle W., “Dark fleet tanker reportedly detained off Finland after undersea cable cut”
Lloyd’s List, 26th December 2024. Available at https://www.lloydslist.com/LL1151949/Dark-fleet-tanker-
reportedly-detained-off-Finland-after-undersea-cable-cut
42 FRESNEDA, Carlos, “Cerco a los barcos de Putin en el Mediterráneo” El Mundo, 19th July 2025.
Available at https://www.elmundo.es/internacional/2025/07/18/687a7bcb21efa0aa2a8b4590.html
43 SCHOFIELD, Hugh “French troops board oil tanker linked to Russian 'shadow fleet” BBC, 1st Octubre 2025.
Available at https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cx2j1gynjddo
44 “Francia abordó un petrolero ruso de la “flota fantasma” que estaría vinculado a los drones detectados
en Dinamarca” Infobae 1st October 2025. Available at
https://www.infobae.com/america/mundo/2025/10/01/francia-abordo-un-petrolero-ruso-de-la-flota-
fantasma-que-estaria-vinculado-a-los-drones-detectados-en-dinamarca/
45 “Una ola de sospechosas explosiones de petroleros recorre el Mediterráneo” El Mercantil, 4th July de
2025.

Opinion Paper  08/2026  14
                   Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

                       Alberto Priego

The first of these incidents took place on 27 June 202546 and involved the ship Vilamoura
(Liberian flag), which was sunk off the Libyan coast near Zuwentina. The second was that
of the Seajewel (Panamanian flag) and occurred on 15 February 202547 in the Italian port
of Savona-Vado. The third incident was the sabotage of the Grace Ferrum, which
occurred on 20 March 202548 in the port of Tripoli. The last was the sinking of the Ursa
Major, which occurred on 24 December 202449 just 57 miles off the coast of Almería.

.

Map 5. Incidents involving Russian ghost ships in the Mediterranean.Own Elaboration

Conclusions

Since the fall of the USSR and, in particular, the expansion of NATO into Eastern Europe,
Russia has increased its presence in the Mediterranean both qualitatively and
quantitatively. While during the Soviet period the Mediterranean Sea was an area of little
influence for Moscow, it has now become a priority area for Russia, which sees
opportunities to open a second front with Europe. NATO's penetration into what Moscow
considered its near abroad has turned the Mediterranean into a strategic asset of the first

46 “Explosive device likely damaged Greek tanker (VIlamoura) off Libya last week” Reuters, 6th July 2025.
Disponible en https://www.reuters.com/world/explosive-device-likely-damaged-greek-tanker-off-libya-last-week-
operator-says-2025-07-06/
47 BARKHUSH, Amira “Explosions Damage Russian Shadow Fleet Oil Tanker Seajewel in Italian Port” United 24, 18th
Febreo 2025. Disponible en https://united24media.com/latest-news/explosions-damage-russian-shadow-fleet-oil-
tanker-seajewel-in-italian-port-5979
48 “The Liberia-flagged chemical and products tanker Grace Ferrum was damaged off Libya in February, three
sources said, with one adding that the vessel would require a salvage operation” Reuters, 19th Febrero 2025.
Disponible en https://www.reuters.com/business/energy/three-tankers-damaged-by-blasts-mediterranean-last-
month-causes-unknown-sources-2025-02-19/
49 “Rusia afirma que el hundimiento de su barco entre España y Argelia fue un acto terrorista”, El País, 24th
December 2024.Disponible en https://elpais.com/internacional/2024-12-25/rusia-afirma-que-el-hundimiento-de-
su-barco-entre-espana-y-argelia-fue-un-acto-terrorista.html

Opinion Paper  08/2026                                                               15
                   Russian strategy in the Mediterranean: A second front

                       Alberto Priego

order. However, despite Russia's desire to influence this area, Moscow has not only failed
to solve its infrastructure problems but has actually increased them. Specifically, I am
referring to the lack of ports where its ships can be repaired and resupplied in the
Mediterranean. The loss of the Tartus naval base has precipitated events, forcing Russia
to seek alternatives in places such as Libya and Algeria.
This lack of capacity has significantly conditioned its strategy in the region. Russia's
inability to influence Mediterranean countries has led Moscow to focus on the Sahel. This
area has become a hotbed of instability, reaching Europe via the Mediterranean and
destabilising societies on the old continent. Migration, drug and terrorism issues are
shaking up traditional electoral bases, opening up options for extreme parties closer to
the Kremlin's interests.
On the other hand, the international organisations responsible for European security –
NATO and the EU – are divided over whether to focus their efforts on the southern or
eastern flank. In this regard, the Nordic countries and the CEECs believe that all
budgetary efforts should be focused on the Russian threat, while those in the south are
committed to addressing the challenges coming from North Africa. The reality is that these
are complementary realities, as the Sahel has its own problems, which have been
exacerbated by Russian action in the area.

                                                                                                 Alberto Priego*
                                                                         Associate Professor (Comillas University)

                                                                                                          @Alberto.Priego

Opinion Paper  08/2026  16
